---
layout: post
title: Where's My Monitoring?
---

Jenn and I were recently arguing about taking vitamin and other dietary
supplements. Historically, I&#8217;d been rather dismissive towards them
because they always felt very pseudo-scientific, but I&#8217;d never really
thought about why it was that I felt that way.

Obviously it&#8217;s possible that they&#8217;re filling a very real need,
particularly for people who have unusual diets (we&#8217;re vegetarian for
example, which isn&#8217;t particularly unusual these days, but might be
considered unusual on an evolved-from-monkeys-timescale). But (and it&#8217;s
a big but), there&#8217;s really no practical way to know what effect of
taking these things is. You could go for a weekly battery of
blood/skin/whatever tests, but that&#8217;s both costly and time-consuming.
Other than that, it falls to either correlation with secondary effects, or
&#8220;how I feel&#8221; both of which are way too heavily influenced by other
things going on in life and placebo effects.

Visiting any supplement or &#8220;natural&#8221;-something-or-other store
reveals thousands of random options. The thing that really bothers me, is that
if it they turn out not to be helping, at best you&#8217;re wasting a lot of
money (if they&#8217;re doing nothing), but at worst, you could be creating
health problems by ingesting mixes of things that really aren&#8217;t good for
you.

So, getting to the point of all this, why can&#8217;t I monitor myself yet?
<b>I think this would pretty clearly be a game-changing startup</b>: I stick
my finger in a little machine before I get in the shower in the morning and it
grabs some blood and skin (and maybe occasionally I give it some hair as a
little treat). Then, it chugs away extracting as much useful information as is
possible from the samples (lots and lots and lots of info in there!). Add a
WiFi connection to it, and it doesn&#8217;t need any interface at all, just
the ability to upload data to either a local machine, or preferably to a
suitably encrypted and secured web site. The web site can give me a history of
changes, monitor for flucuations, highlight defiencies (and maybe suggest
supplements or diet modifications), or tell me that now would be a damn good
idea to go see an MD or nutritionist.

So, where the heck is my simple desktop monitoring system?
