---
layout: post
---

So, I just got my second <a
href="http://www.daskeyboard.com/">http://www.daskeyboard.com/</a> in the
mail. The first one I had was the &#8220;original&#8221;, and I loved and
continue to love it. I&#8217;ve been using it as my work keyboard (where I do
the majority of my coding) for the last 3 years or so.

I just got a second one, but it&#8217;s the &#8220;new&#8221; version (the
only one they offer now). It&#8217;s cleaner design-wise, but there&#8217;s
some things that I think they&#8217;ve made worse.

The first is that the keyboard is just too thick. It&#8217;s gotten half an
inch (or so) thicker. It feels more solid now, and is quite a bit heavier (so
it doesn&#8217;t move around at all, which is nice), but the angle of my
forearms is slightly higher, which inevitably means my wrists are more crooked
when I get more tired and drop my arms, and slouch, etc. Don&#8217;t like that
very much, especially as I&#8217;ve had some wrist and arm pain recently.

They also seem to have killed the variable resistance on keys (or at least
tuned them differently). The only key I notice that&#8217;s harder resistance
is the backspace key, whereas the space key used to have a lot more
resistance, and doesn&#8217;t all now. Perhaps the resistance has changed over
time on my original one, so it&#8217;s just a matter of getting used to this
one, or breaking it in more. Maybe it&#8217;s more expensive to do the bands
of keys with different resistances, but I&#8217;m pretty sad about it,
especially since this one ended up being about 30% more expensive than the
original.

Oh, and the F and J have icky bumps instead of being nicely scooped. :(
I&#8217;m guessing that one was a concession to people who weren&#8217;t very
good typists, and couldn&#8217;t find the home row, but I prefer the scoops,
since we are going for &#8220;stealth&#8221; here, after all. They just felt
nicer on your finger tips too.

The sound of the switches has changed too, but that&#8217;s just&#8230;
different, not really better or worse.

I&#8217;m going to guard my old one even more carefully now with the knowledge
that they&#8217;re not <i>really </i>replaceable. Hopefully I&#8217;ll grow to
love the new one as much, but the jury&#8217;s still
out.
