---
layout: post
title: Back from the holidays &mdash; brain-reboot time...
---

Time to wade out of the eggnog haze, and get that old stupid brain in gear
again after a vacation.

SICP revisited? Smalltalk-80? A CL project?

For the first time in a while, I feel like working on something that's
explicitly focused on an incremental revenue stream.

I'm pretty confident that "clickware for the masses" *ala* [Business of
Software](http://discuss.joelonsoftware.com/?biz) is never going to make
retirement levels of income, or even daily-job-replacement levels of income,
so a minor income supplement is the goal.

But in fact, I have no idea if my first idea will be saleable. So, digging
deeper, the goal isn't even really a income supplement, but instead to try to
learn whether or not there's any market for this style of software. And
assuming there is a market, whether I'm willing and able to learn the skills
required to find a sales niche in this market.

The first actual product idea that came to mind in an evening of brainstorming
with my wife was a [decent kid-safe browser](http://www.internetmomma.com/).
The plan in the sense of (Hopefully) Minimum Viable Product is a whitelist
built into an existing browser. I think there's a lot of room for expansion of
features and capabilities, if people want such a thing.

So, off I go. In writing down the things to be done, the most obvious thing
that jumps out is that somewhere on the order of 80% of the things to be done
are not "what I do". The work involved is writing sales copy, making web pages
and CSS, setting up payment processors, and so on. There's a bit of technical
evaluation, a smattering of C++ to write, but there's not a lot to that side
of things.

I have *absolutely no idea how to sell software*, despite having been making
quite a good living for the last 10 years ostensibly
[selling](http://www.ea.com/) [software](http://www.us.playstation.com/).

It'd sure be a lot easier and more comfortable to jump back into that big ol'
rut, and write a library that does something neat, preferably in an obscure
language to avoid getting too many users, and then "ship it" by pushing to
github.

So going a bit deeper still: the real meta goal is to do a brain-reboot.
Ctrl-Alt-Del me please, but maintain all of the good previous state
information.
