---
layout: newpost
title: Bike Trailer
---

I got weirdly obsessed with bicycle trailers a few weeks ago. Not cargo
trailers, or dog trailers, but camper-as-in-RV trailers. In practice
they seem to mostly be intended to be towed by ebikes due to weight, but
some come in at practical-pedal-power weight too.

For some reason this seems to be popular in Germany in particular, so
I've been watching an inordinate number of YouTube videos in German with
closed captioning and using Google Translate to auto-translate to
English as I regrettably don't speak German. (It doesn't work that
well.) In any case, there's a surprising number of people making their
own "Fahrradwohnwagen"s or "FaWoWa" if you suck at German spelling, as I
do. If you want a taste, check out this [recent
meetup](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BWR7fUVk9Z8)!

Many Germans build with Coroplast over aluminum, I think largely due to
[Paul Elkins](https://elkinsdiy.com/nomad-bicycle-camper/) and [Rene
Kreher](https://www.youtube.com/c/renekreher/videos), and there's a very
deep hole to fall down if you want to explore the intricate details of
everyone's designs and variations and customizations.

Naturally, I decided I need to build my own! There were lengthy
unnecessary detours reading and learning about fibreglassing, aluminum
metal work, solar panels, insulation, and more. I really like the idea
of a ["foamie"](https://www.tnttt.com/viewforum.php?f=55) though. This
is a DIY-friendly construction method used for lightweight trailers (but
typically not quite as light as bike-towable). It consists of using
regular pink foam insulation board as the structure, and then wrapping
it in some sort of fibreglassing. The classic foamie uses "PMF" (Poor
Man's Fibreglass) rather than actual glass fibres with epoxy. Instead it
uses plain cotton canvas, a specific type of water-resistant wood glue,
and then a specific recipe of exterior latex paint to create what is by
most accounts a surprisingly robust and durable exterior finish.

After an embarrassing amount of time in SketchUp coming up with
convoluted fancy designs I realized if I wanted to learn about all these
under-documented (or German-documented!) techniques I really should
start as simple as possible, and so my "design" for a [Brutalist Bike
Trailer](/images/bike-trailer-2022-09-09.png) (as in the architecture
style, but realistically also pretty brutal to spend time in). It's
basically a box with wheels, air holes, a door, and a window, and I'm
not sure about keeping the window.

Today was the first day I had some time to try some actual work on it in
the garage. It went [very badly](https://youtu.be/9x7fDlGmmzs), during
ripping the first piece of wood, I realized the table saw fence wasn't
working and was up to my arms in sawdust, WD-40, and rust for the next 5
hours. It can only get better from here.
